A write in this lecture we're going to go ahead and talk about shapes now what shapes are the second
most important thing when it comes to drawing next to lines.
So what is a shape.
Well there's two different types of shapes.
There's geometrical shapes and there's organic shapes.
Now you're probably pretty familiar with both but you're probably more familiar with geometric shapes.
These are the shapes that you grew up with and learned about in school.
So the simple shapes that make up the basic geometric shapes are first the square which can also then
be turned on its side to make a diamond.
And then there's also the circle.
Then there's the triangle.
Then there's the trap as a way
and then there's the practical.
So these are the basic shapes that make up basically everything.
Now what are organic shapes well.
Or any sheet or anything that aren't geometrical geometrical means that it can be figured out using
math.
So a triangle you can create a triangle by using map but an organic shape.
Nowadays you can actually create organic shapes using math but it's a lot more technical So an organic
shape would be let's say the shape of a pumpkin.
So if I just drew the outline of a pumpkin like so that's an organic shape or an organic shape could
be something very scribbly like cell or another organic shape could be let's say a coffee mug so I can
draw me cause I'm like so.
And that is in organic shape it's not geometrical and geometrical also means that you can split it right
down the middle and it's the same on both sides.
These are organic because you can do this you kind of can't with a pumpkin but the pumpkin is still
considered more of an organic shape.
Now everything can be broken down into these basic shapes and from those basic shapes what you do next
is you create organic shapes.
So for example let's say we're drawing character and the character's head is going to be a circle.
OK.
So we're going to draw a circle like so and then they're going to have a bottom.
Let's say the body is a skinny rectangle like so.
And then let's say we need to add some legs in there.
So we're just going to draw it in triangles for the legs for now and they're a little bit curved.
And then let's say the feet are rectangles like so and then you need some arms so will do triangles
for the arms long triangles.
And then we'll do circles for his hands and we can also add this arm behind his body like so what you'll
see is completely made out of simple shapes.
Let's try something else.
Let's say we want to draw a link up.
Well a lamp can also be broken down into simple shapes.
Now even though there's going to be some perspective involved with this lamp when you're first trying
to sketch out your images you want to start with simple shapes so for a lamp we might start with a lampshade
that will just be a simple trap as a way and then we're going to create the base.
Now the base can be any type of shape you want.
For me it's going to be an oval which that's also another thing is the circle can also is also considered
an ellipse and so ovals also apply to the simple shapes.
So let's go ahead and add that in so I added in like so.
And then we can go ahead and add an rectangle for the stem for the neck of our lamp.
And now we have a lot of very basic shapes.
Now once you get it to this point then you can go ahead and start turning these into more organic shapes.
And so you do that by let's say we add a little chin on our head on our head and then we can go ahead
and get our neck in.
Let's say we kind of curve this out a little bit more.
So it's not so rigid.
And then we can go ahead and also add some hair to our characters so I'm not sure how we want this hair
to look but maybe something like So
when our character has some hair.
And these are much more organic shapes and maybe we add a little bit more of a bend to his arm.
So it's not just such a curvy sort of neurally arm.
And now if we were to trace out the shape of our character it would be a lot more organic looking.
Let's try this with our Sophie move over to her land.
We might slice off this bottom here like so.
So it's nice and flat and we might make this more of an egg shape than an oval shape.
And then with this we might introduce a little bit more perspective.
And so we might add more curve along the bottom like so and then we might add sort of an oval up here
at the top so that we can see sort of down into the top of our lampshade.
And now we have a much more organic shape.
Another thing to understand about shapes is that they create empty spaces.
So for example this is considered an empty space right here or a negative space negative space is very
important when you're drawn.
So you want to keep track of all your negative spaces down here between his legs.
You could also consider this area right here.
Negative Space as well as sort of here where some other places you see negative space.
But let's say that we have a guy sitting on a bench.
And this guy's going to be thinking he's going to have his head down like so and he's going to have
his arm out like this and that's going to be propping his head up in his other arm will just be sitting
next to him like so
so and then ever done.
Now where is the empty space in this.
Well the empty space is going to be right here in this area and right here in this area that's empty
space.
You want to make sure that you have empty space in your artwork because it makes the artwork look a
lot better.
So when ever you can add the empty space and do it now I'm going to go ahead and jump into Photoshop
and demonstrate to you how images can be broken down into simple shapes.
You want to start looking at the world as simple shapes and not as images.
All right.
So here we are in Photoshop.
Now the reason why I'm doing this in Photoshop is because this is the easiest way for me to draw on
top of an image and demonstrate this to you guys.
So let's go ahead and get started.
If you want to do this also you can just draw on top of a printed off picture or if you have Photoshop
you can do the same way I'm doing it.
So what I'm going to do is I use my brush tool and I'm just going to draw on top of us.
So we have a Mickey-Mouse here.
I'm just going to start breaking them down into a simple shapes.
So first starting with his head his head is just a simple circle and then his nose is an oval.
His tip of his nose also an oval.
His bottom part is an oval.
His ears are circles.
We have a rectangle right here and then two ovals for the hat.
And then we have circles for the hands and then rectangles for the arms.
And then we have sort of a trap is void or rectangle shape for the body.
And then we have basically a circle for the torso.
And then we have little rectangles for these bottom parts or as pant legs.
And then we have rectangles for his legs.
And then for the feet I'm just going to break them down into simple blocks like so.
So now we have the simple shapes laid out of Mickey-Mouse Let's go ahead and turn off our image so we
can see those shapes.
So you can see the entire Mickey-Mouse is made out of very simple shapes and just an interesting fact
when Walt Disney first designed Mickey Mouse he wanted them to be made out of extremely simple shapes
so that any animator could replicate them and animate them extremely easily just by tracing pennies
and other objects.
So this is why I started out with Mickey Mouse because I knew that he's created out of very very simple
shapes.
Now how can we turn these simple shapes into more of an organic shape.
Well that's where we start refining things like the feet.
So if we turn the drawing back on we can go ahead and add a new layer above this and we can start refining
this block into more of the shape of his foot.
So something like so and his legs kind of have more of a bend to him.
You can start working on this foot.
So if we turn our drawing layer off and we turn off our background image you'll see we search to get
something that's certain to resemble something a lot more like Mickey Mouse.
Now the point of doing this is you lay out your shapes like so and then you want to do another layer
on top of that.
Or if you're drawn with paper and pencil then you want to lightly draw your shapes out and then on top
of that you start actually refining it into your organic shapes.
This is how professionals do their art work.
So a lot of people just want to go straight in and start drawing image.
But you need to work from the basics and move all the way up to the more intricate details of your artwork.
Let's go ahead and break another image down into its shapes.
So here we have a landscape.
So I use my brush again.
I'm going to go ahead and break this down into simple shapes.
So starting with my horizon line I'm just going to go ahead and create a line going crosslink so and
so that's our first basic shape.
It's just sort of this rectangle down here.
Next is the tree.
So the trees kind of a line with a circle on top of it.
And then our mountains can be broken down into two triangles.
So one like so and then the other one in front of it
and then this other mountain back here can be more of a trap Zoid.
So it's got a flat top and those are the basic shapes if you wanted to you can even include this cloud
back here it's kind of a triangle shape.
And let's go and turn on that background image off so I can see even this image can be broken down into
basic shapes.
And once you get it broken down into basic shapes then you can go in and add detail like more of a curve
along the bottom edge of the mountain.
Same with over here you can add a little bit more there.
Your tree might have a couple of branches sticking off in certain areas.
Your horizon line might not be a completely straight line it might have more of a zigzag effect to it
because there's little trees and plants and all kinds of things along the edge maybe even some bushes
out there.
Let's try one more image.
So this is going to be a more complicated image of a girl or a ballerina to be more exact.
And we're going to break her down into her basic images and we're going to break her down into her basic
shapes.
So let's start with her head.
So her head is basically a circle.
I don't bring my bra size up so you can see that a little bit better.
So her head is basically a circle and then it has a triangle attached to it.
So it kind of creates a raindrop sort of a shape then she's got her bone on the back of her head and
then she's got her neck which is a rectangle.
And then her body is couldn't be thought of as two different shapes.
It can be thought of as either a rectangle or can be thought of as a trap as a way to trap Zoids actually.
So we've got a trap isn't there.
And then we've got a trap is always here that kind of comes down more into the waist and then her arm
can be broken down into two rectangles So there's a rectangle there and then there's a rectangle there
and then her hand can just be broken down into one rectangle there one there and one triangle for her
thumb.
Let's break down her other arm so we're seeing sort of the edge of that rectangle and then we're going
to see the edge of this rectangle and it's almost more of a trap as always since it's tapering and more
towards one end and then over here we can break this down into a rectangle and then a triangle for the
thumb and sort of a trap so wide for those that bunch of fingers right there and then her Too-Too can
be broken down into a trap as a way she.
So as you can see even though her tutu is curving around here we're going to leave that out for now.
So we just want to break it into its separate individual basic shapes.
Then her leg is a trap is void and then we have another trap as we've gone down here.
That's making up the calf.
And so the calf is made out to trap as always like so or you could even think about that as a diamond
if you wanted to.
To simplify it even further.
And then we have her foot which is kind of a triangle shape and then we do her back legs so Another
trap is always back here and then we can create another trap there and we can even make this a triangle.
And then this foot can also be broken down into a simple triangle like so.
Now like I said shapes are going to be the most important part when it comes to your drawings.
If you don't get your shapes right nothing else is going to look correct.
So you want to make sure that you really study shapes and images and objects and really start to understand
how they play with each other and play off of each other.
So your assignment for this lecture is to go ahead and take a bunch of images and break them down into
their separate shapes.
Once you've done that then I want you to draw a picture of something let's say a lamp or even a character
that you want to design.
But I only want you to draw the simple shapes once you've done that.
Go ahead and post that to the Q&A section of the Course or the Facebook group so we can all see your
work and your progress.
Thanks for watching this lecture and I really look forward to seeing you in the next one.